---
title: Randomized Routing
---

#Randomized Routing
$n$-dimensional hypercube. Vertices are strings in $\{0,1\}^n$. $N=2^n$ is number of vertices. $\pi$ is any permutation. Goal: $i$ send packet to $\pi(i)$ simultaneously.

Each edge can send only 1 packet at a timestamp. FIFO.

__definition__: oblivious strategy: route for one packets is independent from other routes.

__KKT90__: Any deterministic oblivious strategy requires $\Omega(\sqrt{N/n})$ time in worst case.

__algorithm VB[81]__:

- phase 1:  each packet $i$ is routed to u.a.r chosen $\delta(i)$. different vertices can share $\delta$.
- phase 2: from $\delta(i)$ is final destination.

In each routing phrase, use bit-fixing path: fix each bit from left to right. e.g.
$x=00101\to 10101 \to 10111 \to 10110 = y$

__theorem__: Algorithm above terminates in $O(n)$ steps w.h.p.

By symmetry, prove phase 1 only.
Let $D(i)$ be delay of $i$. Total/Longest time taken is $n+\max_i D(i)$.
We'll prove $$ \forall i, Pr[D(i)>cn]<e^{-2n}$$,
then $$
Pr[\exists i: D(i)>cn]\le 2^n e^{-2n} < 2^{-n}
$$


Let $P_i=(e_1, e_2, \ldots, e_k)$ be path of $i$.$S_i = \{j\neq i : P_j\cap P_i \neq \emptyset\}$. (If $e=P_{iu}=P_{jv}, e\in P_i\cap P_j$)

__claim__: $D_i \le |S_i|$

If $P_i\cap P_j \neq \emptyset$, insection must be a consecutive segment.
Fix $i$, define lag of $j\in S(i)$: at start of timestamp $t$, $j$ wants to traverse $e_l\in P_i$, then lag of $j$ is $t-l$. (If $j$ moves at $t$, either lag of $j$ remains the same, or $j$ leaves $P_i$)

The lag of $i$ is a sequence $1,2,\ldots, D(i)$. For each $0\le L \le D(i)$, consider last timestamp at which some $j\in S(i)\cup\{i\}$ has lag $L$. If $j$ moves, $j$ must leaves $P_i$ or reach its destination, otherwise lag of $j$ remains $L$; if $j$ stays, there must be another $k$ with lag $L$ that blocks $j$ ($k$ leaves $P_i$ or reaches dest). Thus, each time global minimum $L$ increases, some $j$ leaves $P_i$ or reaches its destination. And each $j$ counts at most once. So $D_i \le |S_i|$.

Define $$
H_{ij} = \begin{cases}
1 & P_i \cap P_j \neq \emptyset \\
0 & \text{otherwise}
\end{cases}
$$
$D(i)\le \sum_{j\neq i} H_{ij}$. $H_{ij}$ are **independent** (pick $P_i$ first). Bound $\sum H_{ij}$, tricky, bound $\mu=E[\sum H_{ij}]$ first.

Define $$
T(e_l) = \text{# paths that pass through } e_l \in P_i
$$

By symmetry, $$
E[T(e_l)] = \frac{\text{total len of all paths}  }{\text{# directed edges} } = {N(n/2) \over Nn} = \frac{1}{2}
$$
($k$ is len of $P_i$)
$$
E[\sum_{j\neq i} H_{ij}] \le k/2 \le n/2
$$

Chernoff bound (Angluin/Valiant version)
$$
Pr[D(i)\ge (1+\beta)\mu] \le Pr[\sum H_{ij}\ge (1+\beta)\mu] \le \exp(-{\beta^2 \over 2+\beta}\mu)
$$

Fix $(1+\beta)\mu=\alpha$, $\exp(-{\beta^2 \over 2+\beta}\mu)$ is maximized when $\mu$ is maximized. So that
$$
Pr[D(i)\ge(1+\beta){n\over 2}] \le \exp(-{\beta^2 \over 2+\beta} {n\over 2})
$$

To make $\beta^2/(4+2\beta)>2$, take $\beta=6$, $$ Pr[D(i)\ge 3.5n] \le \exp(-9n/4)]
$$
